docs: update Python environments documentation for release of Python Envs Ext as default (#9364)
Microsoft/vscode-docs: docs/python/environments.md

---
# Python environments in VS Code

The Python Environments extension brings environment and package management into VS Code's UI. Whether you use venv, uv, conda, pyenv, poetry, or pipenv, the extension provides a single interface for all of them—create environments, install packages, and switch interpreters the same way regardless of which tool manages them.

Core features:

- 🌐 Creating, deleting, and switching between environments
- 📦 Installing and managing packages
- ✅ Activated python in terminals
- 🖌️ Assigning environments to specific files or folders (called "Python projects")

The extension works alongside the Python extension and requires no setup to get started.

## Quick Start

> **Most users don't need to configure anything.** The extension automatically discovers your Python environments and uses them when you run code.

Author: I just meant user's code here

> **Most users don't need to configure anything.** The extension automatically discovers your Python environments and uses them when you run code.

Reviewer: Maybe add the word 'your' then? It was confusing for me. 

The extension automatically discovers your Python environments and uses them when you run your Python code.

> **Most users don't need to configure anything.** The extension automatically discovers your Python environments and uses them when you run code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Most users don't need to configure anything.** The extension automatically discovers your Python environments and uses them when running code.
```

If you have a simple setup (one environment for your whole workspace):

1. Open a Python file

> 2. Check the status bar to see which environment is active

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Check the Status Bar to see which environment is active
```

> 3. Click the status bar to switch environments if needed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. To switch environments, select the environment control in the Status Bar
```

| Pyenv         | `$PYENV_ROOT/versions` or `~/.pyenv/versions`                                        |
| Poetry        | Project `.venv` folders and `~/.cache/pypoetry/virtualenvs`                          |
| Pipenv        | `~/.local/share/virtualenvs` (Linux/macOS) or `%USERPROFILE%\.virtualenvs` (Windows) |

Discovery runs automatically when the extension activates. The extension uses a Rust binary called PET (Python Environment Tool) that scans your system for Python environments. PET finds environment managers by checking your PATH (e.g., looking for `conda`, `pyenv`, `poetry` executables) and known installation locations, then searches for environments managed by each.

To manually trigger a refresh:

1. Open the Command Palette (`Cmd+Shift+P` / `Ctrl+Shift+P`)
2. Run **Python Environments: Refresh All Environment Managers**

You can also click the refresh icon in the **Environment Managers** view header.

![Screenshot showing the Environment Managers panel in the Python sidebar with the refresh button highlighted in the view header.](images/environments/environmentRefresh.png)

_Click the refresh icon to re-scan for environments._

> ### Viewing Discovered Environments

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### View discovered environments
```

1. **Environment Managers view** — In the Python sidebar, environments are grouped by manager type (venv, Conda, etc.)
2. **Environment selection** — When selecting an interpreter for a project, all discovered environments appear in a unified list

![Screenshot showing the Environment Managers tree view with Global, venv, and Conda sections expanded, displaying discovered Python environments grouped by manager type.](images/environments/EnvironmentManagerTree.png)

_The Environment Managers view groups environments by type._

> **Don't have an environment yet?** See [Managing Python Projects](managing-python-projects.md) to create one.

### Configuring Search Paths

By default, the extension searches your entire workspace for virtual environments using the glob pattern `./**/.venv`. This finds any folder named `.venv` anywhere in your workspace.

To discover environments in custom locations, update the `python-envs.workspaceSearchPaths` setting:

> **Note**: This setting must be configured at the workspace or folder level, not user level.

```json
{
  "python-envs.workspaceSearchPaths": [
    "./**/.venv",
    "./envs/**",
    "./my-custom-env"
  ]
}
```

**Tips**:

> - Use `**` for recursive searches (e.g., `./**/env` finds any folder named `env` at any depth)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Use `**` for recursive searches (for example, `./**/env` finds any folder named `env` at any depth)
```

- Relative paths resolve from your workspace folder root

To quickly open search path settings:

1. Open the Command Palette
2. Run **Python Environments: Configure Search Settings**

![Screenshot showing the VS Code Settings editor filtered to the Python Environments extension, displaying the python-envs Workspace Search Paths setting with a glob pattern entry.](images/environments/workspaceSearchPathsConfiguration.png)

_Add custom glob patterns to search additional locations._

**Global search paths**: For environments outside your workspace (like a shared `~/envs` folder), use `python-envs.globalSearchPaths`:

```json
{
  "python-envs.globalSearchPaths": [
    "/Users/yourname/envs",
    "/opt/shared-envs"
  ]
}
```

This setting requires absolute paths and is configured at the user (global) level.

**Legacy settings**: If you previously used `python.venvPath` or `python.venvFolders`, these are automatically merged with the new search paths. Consider migrating to `python-envs.globalSearchPaths` for future compatibility.

### Selecting an Environment

To use a discovered environment:

> - **Status bar**: Click the Python version shown at the bottom of the window

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **Status Bar**: select the Python version shown at the bottom of the window
```

1. Open the Command Palette
2. Run **Python Environments: Run Python Environment Tool (PET) in Terminal...**
3. Choose an option:
   - **Find All Environments** — Runs `pet find --verbose` to list all discovered environments with detailed output
   - **Resolve Environment...** — Enter a path to a Python executable to debug why a specific environment isn't being detected

![Screenshot showing the VS Code terminal with verbose output from the Python Environment Tool, displaying a breakdown of search times by locator, environment counts by type, and discovered managers.](images/environments/PETVerbose.png)

_PET verbose output shows exactly what environments are discovered and why._

This is useful when:

- You need to verify an environment is being detected
- You want to understand why an environment appears under a specific manager
- You're debugging path resolution issues

## Creating, Deleting and Managing Environments

### Creating Environments

The extension provides two ways to create environments: **Quick Create** for speed, and **Custom Create** for control.

**Quick Create**

> Click the **+** button in the Environment Managers view. The extension:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Select the **+** button in the Environment Managers view. The extension performs the following steps:
```

| Mono-repo with backend + ML service | Both share one interpreter | Each gets its own environment |
| Testing Python 3.10 vs 3.12 | Manually switch interpreters | Assign different versions to different folders |
| Shared workspace with teammates | Everyone configures manually | Settings sync via `.vscode/settings.json` |

If you only have one environment for your whole workspace, you don't need to set up projects explicitly—just select an interpreter and you're done.

```text
Workspace
├── Python Project: backend/
│     └── Environment: .venv (Python 3.12)
│            └── Manager: venv
│
├── Python Project: frontend-utils/
│     └── Environment: .venv (Python 3.10)
│            └── Manager: venv
│
└── Python Project: ml-pipeline/
       └── Environment: ml-env (Python 3.11)
              └── Manager: conda
```

**What uses project assignments?**

- **Running and debugging** — uses the project's environment
- **Terminals** — activated with the project's environment
- **Test Explorer** — each project gets its own test tree with its own interpreter (see [Multi-Project Testing](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-python/wiki/Multi%E2%80%90Project-Testing-in-VS-Code))

> > **Note**: Pylance and Jupyter currently use a single interpreter per workspace, not per-project environments. See [Known Limitations](#known-limitations).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> Pylance and Jupyter currently use a single interpreter per workspace, not per-project environments. See [Known Limitations](#known-limitations).
```

> ### Adding a project

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Add a project
```

![Screenshot showing the Python Projects panel with the Add Python Project dropdown menu displaying Add Existing and Auto Find options.](images/environments/addPythonProject.png)

_Add existing folders or auto-discover projects._

### Assigning an environment

Once a folder is a project, assign its environment:

1. In the **Python Projects** view, click the environment shown under your project (or "No environment")
2. Select from discovered environments

The selected environment is used whenever you run or debug files in that project.

![Screenshot showing the Python Projects view with two projects listed, each assigned a Python environment, and the Environment Managers section below with available interpreters and installed packages.](images/environments/pythonProject.png)

_Click the environment to change it._

### How settings are stored

When you assign an environment to a project, the extension writes to your workspace settings (`.vscode/settings.json`):

```json
{
  "python-envs.pythonProjects": [
    {
      "path": "backend",
      "envManager": "ms-python.python:venv"
    },
    {
      "path": "ml-service",
      "envManager": "ms-python.python:conda"
    }
  ]
}
```

> Notice that settings store the **environment manager**, not hardcoded interpreter paths. The extension remembers which specific environment you selected separately, and resolves it at runtime. This design makes settings shareable:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notice that settings store the **environment manager**, not hardcoded interpreter paths. The extension remembers which specific environment you selected separately, and resolves it at run-time. This design makes settings shareable:
```

### Learn more

For detailed guidance on templates, multi-root workspaces, common scenarios, and troubleshooting, see the full [Python Projects guide](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-python-environments/wiki/Making-and-Managing-Python-Projects).

## Package Management

Install and uninstall Python packages directly from VS Code without opening a terminal.

### Installing packages

1. In the **Environment Managers** view, find an environment
2. Right-click and select **Manage Packages**
3. Search for packages and select ones to install

Or run **Python Envs: Manage Packages** from the Command Palette.

![Screenshot showing the Manage Packages dialog with a search box at the top and a scrollable list of packages with checkboxes, indicating installed packages and the total number selected for installation.](images/environments/ManagePackages.png)

_Search and install packages directly from VS Code._

**Installing from a requirements file**: You can also install packages from `requirements.txt`, `pyproject.toml`, or `environment.yml`. When prompted, select the file and the extension installs all listed dependencies.

> ### Uninstalling packages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Uninstall packages
```

1. Expand an environment in the **Environment Managers** view to see installed packages
2. Right-click a package and select **Uninstall Package**

### Package managers by environment

The extension automatically uses the appropriate package manager based on your environment:

| Environment | Package Manager |
|-------------|-----------------|
| venv        | pip             |
| conda       | conda           |
| pyenv       | pip             |
| poetry      | pip             |
| pipenv      | pip             |
| system      | pip             |

To override the default, set `python-envs.defaultPackageManager`.

### Faster installation with uv

If [uv](https://github.com/astral-sh/uv) is installed and `python-envs.alwaysUseUv` is enabled (the default), package installation in venv environments uses `uv pip` instead of regular pip—significantly faster for large dependency trees.

> ## Settings and Configuration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Settings and configuration
```

When you open a workspace, the extension determines which environment to use by checking these sources in order:

| Priority | Source | When it applies |
|----------|--------|-----------------|
| 1 | `pythonProjects[]` | If you've configured a project for this path |
| 2 | `defaultEnvManager` | Only if you've explicitly set this (not the default value) |
| 3 | `python.defaultInterpreterPath` | Legacy setting, if configured |
| 4 | Auto-discovery | Finds workspace-local `.venv`, then global interpreters |

**Key principle**: User-configured settings always win over defaults. If you haven't explicitly set `defaultEnvManager` (it just has the built-in default), the extension skips it and checks the next priority.

**Caching**: The extension caches resolved environments for performance, but your explicit settings always take precedence over cached values. You never need to worry about stale cache overriding your choices.

For more details on interpreter selection behavior, see the [Interpreter Selection Quick Reference](https://github.com/microsoft/vscode-python-environments/wiki/Python-Interpreter-Selection:-Quick-Reference).

### When settings are written

> The extension only writes to settings when **you** make an explicit change:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The extension only writes to settings when you make an explicit change:
```

| Action | Writes to settings? |
|--------|---------------------|
| Open workspace (first time) | ❌ No |
| Extension auto-selects an environment | ❌ No |
| You manually select an environment | ✅ Yes — updates `pythonProjects` |
| You create a new environment | ✅ Yes — may update `pythonProjects` |
| You change settings in UI | ✅ Yes |

> This means opening a workspace never pollutes your `settings.json` with auto-generated configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This ensures that opening a workspace does not add auto-generated entries to your `settings.json`.
```

### Python Environments settings

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|
| `python-envs.defaultEnvManager` | `ms-python.python:venv` | Default environment manager for creating environments. Options: `ms-python.python:venv`, `ms-python.python:conda` |
| `python-envs.defaultPackageManager` | `ms-python.python:pip` | Default package manager. Usually determined by the environment manager. |
| `python-envs.pythonProjects` | `[]` | Array of project configurations. Managed via UI — rarely edited manually. |
| `python-envs.workspaceSearchPaths` | `["./**/.venv"]` | Glob patterns to search for environments in your workspace. Must be set at workspace level. |

> | `python-envs.globalSearchPaths` | `[]` | Absolute paths to search for environments globally (e.g., `~/envs`). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `python-envs.globalSearchPaths` | `[]` | Absolute paths to search for environments globally (for example, `~/envs`). |
```

| `python-envs.alwaysUseUv` | `true` | Use uv for venv creation and package installation when available. |

### Terminal settings

When you open a terminal in VS Code, the extension automatically activates your selected Python environment so that `python`, `pip`, and related commands use the correct interpreter.

| Setting | Default | Description |
|---------|---------|-------------|

> | `python-envs.terminal.autoActivationType` | `shellStartup` | How environments are activated in terminals. See below. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| `python-envs.terminal.autoActivationType` | `shellStartup` | Determines how environments are activated in terminals. See below. |
```

| `python-envs.terminal.showActivateButton` | `false` | (Experimental) Show activate/deactivate button in terminal. |
| `python.terminal.useEnvFile` | `false` | When `true`, injects variables from `.env` files into terminals. |
| `python.envFile` | `${workspaceFolder}/.env` | Path to the `.env` file to use when `useEnvFile` is enabled. |

**Terminal activation types:**

| Value | Behavior | Best for |
|-------|----------|----------|
| `shellStartup` | Activates via shell startup scripts—environment is active immediately when the terminal opens | Copilot terminal commands, cleaner experience |
| `command` | Runs the activation command visibly in the terminal after it opens | Compatibility with all shells |
| `off` | No automatic activation | Manual control |

> > **Tip**: Use `shellStartup` if you use Copilot to run terminal commands—it ensures the environment is active before the first command executes. This will become the default in a future release.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> Use `shellStartup` if you use Copilot to run terminal commands. It ensures that the environment is active before the first command executes. This will become the default in a future release.
```

### Settings scope reference

Settings behave differently depending on where they're configured:

| Setting | User | Workspace | Folder |
|---------|------|-----------|--------|
| `defaultEnvManager` | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| `defaultPackageManager` | ✅ | ✅ | ❌ |
| `pythonProjects` | ❌ | ✅ | ✅ |
| `workspaceSearchPaths` | ❌ | ✅ | ✅ |
| `globalSearchPaths` | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| `alwaysUseUv` | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |
| `terminal.autoActivationType` | ✅ | ❌ | ❌ |

**Key insight**: `workspaceSearchPaths` must be set at workspace or folder level (not user level) because it's relative to workspace folders.

## Extensibility

The Python Environments extension is designed to be extensible. Any environment or package manager can build an extension that plugs into the Python sidebar, appearing alongside the built-in managers. This means the ecosystem can grow to support new tools without waiting for updates to this extension.

Community members are building extensions for additional environment managers like the [Pixi Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=renan-r-santos.pixi-code).

## Known Limitations

### Pylance and multi-project workspaces

> Pylance does not support multiple Python projects with different interpreters in the same workspace. Even if you configure separate environments for different folders using [Python Projects](#python-projects), Pylance uses a single interpreter for the entire workspace—typically the one associated with the workspace root. If you need Pylance to use a different interpreter for a specific folder, consider opening that folder in a separate VS Code window, or add the subfolder as a workspace folder in a multi-root workspace. Pylance runs per workspace folder, so each folder in a multi-root workspace can have its own interpreter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Pylance does not support multiple Python projects with different interpreters in the same workspace. Even if you configure separate environments for different folders using [Python Projects](#python-projects), Pylance uses a single interpreter for the entire workspace, typically the one associated with the workspace root. If you need Pylance to use a different interpreter for a specific folder, consider opening that folder in a separate VS Code window, or add the subfolder as a workspace folder in a multi-root workspace. Pylance runs per workspace folder, so each folder in a multi-root workspace can have its own interpreter.
```
